Thank
you.
So three more.
Would you like us to bring the submitters in?
Yes. Yeah. So who do we have online?
So these submitters, I believe, are-
I think these are actually- I'm sorry?
Do we have-
Oh, you think there's someone online?
No, I expect more.
Not yet.
No, just assuming.
Not yet. I understand.
How long do we need to wait for,
Clark?
There is quorum, so you could start now.
Yeah, let's start. We--
I think there's a little bit of confusion about the public, private.
So people jumped in the private.
Ready to begin?
Let's kick off.
And after that is the recap. Thank you.
Original
writing stage.
Okay.
No.
Excellent. Right. Well, we're going to resume the Health Select Committee, and
we'll continue hearing oral evidence on the Drug Overdose
Assistance Protection Legislation Bill.
Next submitter is Shelley O'Dwyer.
Is Shelley with us? Excellent. I'll ask you to come to the front and
grab a seat.
Yes. I'll just take my jacket off.
Yes, certainly. Just while you're getting settled,
since we are dealing with a sensitive topic, I will just
remind submitters that the rules of Parliament mean that when we're hearing
your submission, we have to be careful not to hear allegations that may
seriously damage a person's reputation.
If we are concerned that you're going to make a serious allegation or disclose
sensitive information about yourself or others, we will ask you to move
on to your next point. Generally, please do not name other people, make serious
allegation against named or identifiable people, or
include specific or detailed information about the circumstance of an overdose.
Appreciate your personal experience is important to us.
Mm-hmm.
It will help us making recommendations of the bill, but we do ask
for that sensitivity. Well, welcome, Shelley.
We have you down for five minutes.
Yes.
I'll hand that time to you now.
Okay.
Thank you for inviting me here
today. I would like to talk to you more
in detail about my submission.
I am here to support the Good Samaritan Bill
and in remembrance of my son, Jacob, who is now in heaven.
Jacob was twenty-four years old. He was confident,
outgoing, strong, positive, happy.
Jacob enjoyed adventures, and he was in the prime of his life.
Jacob was a popular gym instructor,
a group fitness team leader at a local gym,
and he didn't have a criminal record.
On December the 30th, 2022,
Jacob wanted to party early for New Year's,
and he decided to take an LSD tab.
He was fine for a while, and then his mood changed,
his friend said. He came downstairs out of his apartment.
The friend followed after him and asked him to come back
to his apartment.
She noted he was hot and calling her a different person's
name.
He then decided to lie down in the middle of a road.
The person tried to get him up and bring him back to his flat.
He got up, and then he decided he needed to go for a run.
He got away from her.
Jacob went through an alleyway, jumped over a low gate.
She could see Jacob sprinting across Simon Street.
Then she lost sight of him.
She did her best to find him that night.
A CCTV camera, a day later,
found that Jacob had jumped off Simon Street Bridge.
He was found in the overpass by the police.
When I first heard about him laying in the middle of the road, I
thought, clearly, he must be unwell,
and why didn't she call an ambulance or the police?
The only reason I feel that she didn't was that she was
fearful she would get into trouble with the law or
fearful Jacob would be getting in trouble as he'd taken
an LSD tab.
This fear will be taken away with this bill.
If she did call for help, Jacob would, I feel, be
with us, living with us today,
living his best life.
It's hard with the what ifs,
and it's hard living every day without Jacob.
We have lost our future life with Jacob.
We can't bring Jacob back, but we can save lives going
forward
with this Good Samaritan Bill.
Thank you so much.
Jacob's mum, Shelley.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you, Shelley, and thank you for taking the time to share your
experience, and I do just want to pass on the committee's condolences for your
loss and really appreciate it's a challenging time to come and talk about it.
Yes.
I don't know if anybody has any questions.
No, there doesn't appear to be, but thank you. It is a very moving submission.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
On behalf of Jacob.
Yes.
We will now move on to our next submitter, where we have
Joanne Newton and Kaylee Newton.
Once again, thank you very much for coming to the committee.
I think you probably heard
what I read out before about sensitivities and
things that we don't really want disclosed.
But bearing that in mind, we've allocated five minutes for
your submission. I'll hand that time over to you now.
Kia ora. Thank you. I'm here with my daughter, Kaylee,
to talk
more about this bill, and my son, her brother, Stuart.
Stuart was a known meth user, and he was serving a sentence of
intensive supervision.
He'd been staying with me for a month because he really wanted to get
clean, and I was supporting him to access rehab.
On the 24th of January, at about 8:00 that night,
Stuart had a shower and left my house.
Later that night, a young father returning home found my
son on his neighbor's front lawn in distress.
It was clear he was under the influence of drugs and was overdosing.
The young man rang 111 and waited for help to arrive.
The only information that young man had was that my son was in distress and
had said he was fretting out. So that was all the information
he gave to 111.
He couldn't inform them
much other than what he observed.
The response wasn't fast enough, and when the police arrived, my son was extremely
unwell and was placed in a police car, but tragically passed away.
Where my son was found made no sense to our whanau.
It was at the other end of the hill we lived on, and there was no need for
him to be in that area, and he would never have walked there.
We believe that he had been dumped there by associates he was
with earlier in the night while they were smoking meth.
He was found with no lighter and no shoes, no socks
on.
My son had always told me that he didn't have any friends, and he only had drug
dealers.
We believe he was dumped there in an attempt to get him to my house,
probably because my son was worried about getting in trouble,
and they probably were too.
Knowing exactly what drugs my son had taken and how long ago they were consumed
would've been crucial information that could've made a life-saving
difference.
Because the people
fled to protect themselves, medical responders were left in the dark,
and now my son is gone. The individuals he was with that
night have never come forward, which reinforces the belief that he was
abandoned.
Since his death, family members and friends have shared that they have encountered
situations where they were concerned for others but felt afraid to reach
out because of legal repercussions.
When the fear of legal consequences outweighs the drive to
seek life-saving assistance, a community suffers.
There is a collective responsibility to ensure that the priority in an
emergency is always the preservation of life.
Passing this legislation would improve and remove the barriers that
currently discourage individuals from contacting emergency services
during an overdose.
It aims to foster an environment where saving a life is the
primary focus, free from worries of legal impacts.
The bill represents a significant step forward to ensure that no
other whanau has to endure the pain of losing a loved one to a situation
where help was available but not called upon.
It is a necessary change to support community
safety and health.
It is vital that the message that's sent to the community is clear.
Seeking medical help in an emergency is the right and safe thing to
do. Passing the Drug and
Overdose Legislation Bill is a crucial part of making that a reality.
My son's death was a result of many systematic failures.
We just needed one thing to be different, and this could've been the
one thing.
Kia ora. My name is Kaylee Newton, and thank you for giving me the opportunity to
speak. I'm here as someone who lost their
life. My brother, Stuart, died after an
overdose. He was left on someone's front lawn,
and I'll never know exactly what happened in those final moments, whether fear
played a part, whether someone was too scared to call for help.
When drugs are involved, fear can become stronger than common
sense.
Fear of being arrested, fear of being judged, fear of the
consequences of calling for help.
That's why I support this bill. This legalization tells people that saving
a life is more important than punishment.
If my brother's death can help prevent another family from experiencing
this kind of loss, then speaking today was worth it.
I strongly support this bill because it could save lives. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much. I'll ask the committee.
There doesn't appear to be any questions, but once again, do want to pass on
my condolences for your loss. I appreciate the bravery it's
taken to come and submit on this bill.
So really do appreciate your effort to come and talk to us.
So thank you very much.
Thank you, guys.
Okay.
Thank you
We will now move on to our next submitter, which is Lee
Henley.
Is Lee in the room?
Oh.
A bit like Jeff.
Excellent. Thank you, Lee. I will just
reiterate that the rules of Parliament mean that when hearing your submission,
we have to be careful not to hear allegations that may seriously damage
a person's reputation. If we are concerned that there's going to be serious
allegations or disclosure of information about yourself and
others, we will ask you to move on to your next point.
With that,
we have allocated five minutes for your sub-- I'll hand that time to
you now.
Thank you. Kia ora koutou. Ko Lee Henley taku ingoa.
I'm the executive director of an evaluation disability
agency. I've worked as director of mental health,
and addiction services and manager of community mental health
and addiction services. I'm a registered social worker, and I'm just
completing a PhD, which focuses on reducing harm
related to alcohol use.
I support the concept of this bill.
At its core, it's a practical and evidence-informed step that has the
potential to save lives and reduce harm.
In my experience across mental health, addictions, and community services, we
know that people delay or avoid seeking help during an
overdose because they fear legal consequences.
Reducing that fear is critical.
From a harm reduction perspective, this bill is moving in the right direction.
If we want people to
seek help earlier, especially in high-risk and time-critical situations,
then we need legal settings that prioritize preservation of life
over punishment.
I particularly support that the protections are intended to apply not
only to the person seeking help, but also to the person experiencing
the overdose and others at the scene.
That reflects the reality that overdoses are often witnessed, and that the
decisions people make in those first few minutes can determine whether someone
lives or dies.
I also support the inclusion of protections for people on bail or parole.
We know there is heightened overdose risk after periods of enforced abstinence,
and that makes this an important and realistic part of the bill.
However, I do have concerns about whether it will work as intended in practice.
My first concern is about the definition and application of low-level
offenses. The effectiveness of this bill depends on whether people
trust it.
If there is uncertainty about what is covered or inconsistency in how the
legislation is interpreted by officers on the ground, then people
will still hesitate to call for help.
As we know, in a crisis, hesitation can be fatal.
That means the law needs to be accompanied by very clear operational
guidance and equally clear public communication
so that people understand what the protections do and do not cover.
My second concern is around consistency and equity
in implementation.
Any legislation that relies on interpretation carries a risk of
unequal application. From a health, disability, and social
services perspective, we need to be alert to the possibility that protections may
not be experienced equally by everyone.
This is especially important for communities who already
experience disproportionate harm or disproportionate
justice system contact.
If the protections are not applied consistently, or if some groups remain
uncertain or fearful, then the bill will not achieve its purpose.
My third point regards evaluation, and this is where I feel the bill needs some
stronger attention. If this legislation is passed, it should not simply
be left to operate without post-learning and review.
It needs a developmental evaluation approach so that its effectiveness can be
measured in real time and improved as issues emerge.
This matters because we need to know not just whether the law
exists, but whether it's changing help-seeking behavior, whether people
feel safer calling for help, whether police are applying it
consistently, and whether it is resulting in reduced harm.
A developmental evaluation approach would allow implementation to be
monitored as it unfolds, identify unintended
consequences early, and support practical improvements to guidance,
communication, and application.
This is particularly important for legislation where trust,
interpretation, and public understanding are all central to whether it
works.
I would expect evaluation to look at things such as whether emergency help is
sought earlier, whether there are changes in overdose-related harm or
mortality, whether there are differences in how the law is applied across
populations, and whether people with lived experience feel more confident
seeking help. Lived experience input needs to be a
part of that evaluation from the beginning.
Finally, I want to acknowledge that while the bill is an important step,
it addresses only one part of a much wider issue.
It reduces a particular barrier at the point of crisis, and
that's worthwhile.
But we will never significantly reduce harm from substance use unless we
take broader action. That includes regulating substances
and providing accurate, non-judgmental, safe use
education.
If we're serious about harm reduction, we need to go beyond
emergency protections and address the wider policy settings that
contribute to preventable harm. Kia ora. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you. That was a very well-timed submission.
You have reached five minutes, so we will have to keep
on moving. But I do just want to thank you for coming, taking the time, and sharing
your insights, and all the best for your PhD completion.
Yeah. Kia ora.
Thank you very much.
We will now move into private session.